preview:  AI is being used to minimize the downtime for renewable energy sources to be competitive in the energy market
banner: https://assets.maccarianagency.com/backgrounds/img2.jpg
path: dsforrenewables
author: Rafael
title: Applying Data Science to Promote Renewable Energy
date: October 30, 2021
update-date:
avatar: /assets/pics/me2.jpg

# The Energy Market

The energy market is a difficult one with many challenges. One of the main players who are struggling to make an impact are the renewable energy companies trying to push a renewable energy source to be viable in the market. A company in Chicago that focuses on providing wind energy uses Data Science to be able to have a competitive advantage in the energy market. Using Data science to optimize their workflow and provide consistent uptime.  

Machines today have dozens of sensors that produce massive amounts of data. Artificial Intelligence is being used with the data that machines produce to predict machine failures and provide preventative maintenance on these machines. Renewable energies struggle with high costs per MWh they produce. Replacing parts or machines constantly does not help. Preventing machines from breaking down by predicting when they would fail and sending someone to provide maintenance helps a lot. 

The energy market has its down time and its uptime with peak demand hours. Companies are using market energy forecasts included in their software to provide insights to operators when they should generate energy and when they should perform maintenance. These prediction packages are also being used to detect anomalies in the machines, when a machine should operate at a certain capacity and it is not, then a crew can be sent out to investigate an issue and fix it. AI is being used to predict the weather with these machines so that they can more efficiently adjust to the windspeeds and provide feedback to the maintenance people. 

AI is also being used to figure out how legacy machines work. There are a lot of people who cannot be replaced simply because their knowledge of how legacy machines operate. This is because repairing old machines is sometimes cheaper than getting new ones but the knowledge on how to operate these machines is fading. So Artificial intelligence is being used to figure out how they operate, and the company only needs to hire less people with legacy knowledge. 

Downtime is biggest issue in the energy market because time spent not providing energy is time spent not making money. The ability to preemptively fix problems increases the operator’s confidence, reducing risk, saving on replacement costs, and maximizing on energy production . AI is being used to minimize the downtime for renewable energy sources to be competitive in the energy market. 
